In addition to classification and
regression, machine learning tasks and
techniques can also fall into another
category known as cluster analysis.
After this video, you will be able to
articulate the goal of cluster analysis,
discuss whether cluster analysis
is supervised or unsupervised, and
list some ways that cluster
results can be applied.
In cluster analysis,
the goal is to organize similar items in
your data set into groups or clusters.
By segmenting your data into clusters, you
can analyze each cluster more carefully.
Note that cluster analysis is
also referred to as clustering.
A very common application of cluster
analysis that we have discussed before is
to divide your customer base into segments
based on their purchasing histories.
For example, you can segment customers
into those who have purchased science
fiction books and videos, versus those
who tend to buy nonfiction books,
versus those who have bought
many children's books.
This way, you can provide more targeted
suggestions to each different group.
Some other examples of cluster analysis
are characterizing different weather
patterns for a region,
grouping the latest news articles into
topics to identify the trending
topics of the day, and
discovering hot spots for different
types of crime from police reports
in order to provide sufficient
police presence for problem areas.
Cluster analysis divides all
the samples in a data set into groups.
In this diagram,
we see that the red, green, and
purple data points are clustered together.
Which group a sample is placed in is
based on some measure of similarity.
The goal of cluster analysis is to segment
data so that differences between samples
in the same cluster are minimized, as
shown by the yellow arrow, and differences
between samples of different clusters are
maximized, as shown by the orange arrow.
Visually, you can think of
this as getting samples in
each cluster to be as close
together as possible, and
the samples from different clusters
to be as far apart as possible.
Cluster analysis requires
some sort of metric to
measure similarity between two samples.
Some common similarity measures are
Euclidean distance, which is the distance
along a straight line between two points,
A and B, as shown in this plot.
Manhattan distance, which is
calculated on a strictly horizontal and
vertical path, as shown in the right plot.
To go from point A to point B, you can
only step along either the x-axis or
the y-axis in a two-dimensional case.
So the path to calculate the Manhattan
distance consists of segments
along the axes instead of along a diagonal
path, as with Euclidean distance.
Cosine similarity measures the cosine
of the angle between points A and
B, as shown in the bottom plot.
Since distance measures such as Euclidean
distance are often used to measure
similarity between samples
in clustering algorithms,
note that it may be necessary to
normalize the input variables so
that no one value dominates
the similarity calculation.
We discussed scaling and
normalizing variables in the lecture
on feature transformation.
Normalizing is one method
to scale variables.
Essentially, scaling the input variables
puts the variables on the same scale so
that all variables have equal
weighting in the calculation
to determine similarity between samples.
Scaling is necessary when you have
variables that have very different scales,
such as weight and height.
The magnitude of the height values,
which are in feet and inches,
will be much smaller than the magnitude of
the weight values, which are in pounds.
So scaling both variables to
a common value range will
make the contributions from
both weight and height equal.
Here are some things to note
about cluster analysis.
First, unlike classification or
regression, in general,
cluster analysis is an unsupervised task.
This means that there is no target
label for any sample in the data set.
In general,
there is no correct clustering results.
The best set of clusters
is highly dependent
on how the resulting
clusters will be used.
There are numerical measures to
compare two different clusters, but
since there are no labels to
determine whether a sample has
been correctly clustered,
there is no ground truth
to determine if a set of clustering
results are truly correct or incorrect.
Clusters don't come with labels.
You may end up with five different
clusters at the end of a cluster
analysis process, but you don't
know what each cluster represents.
Only by analyzing
the samples in each cluster
can you come out with reasonable
labels for your clusters.
Given all this, it is important to
keep in mind that interpretation and
analysis of the clusters
are required to make sense of and
make use of the results
of cluster analysis.
There are several ways that the results
of cluster analysis can be used.
The most obvious is data segmentation and
the benefits that come from that.
If you segment your customer base
into different types of readers,
the resulting insights can be used
to provide more effective marketing
to the different customer groups
based on their preferences.
For example, analyzing each segment
separately can provide valuable insights
into each group's likes, dislikes and
purchasing behavior, just like we see
science fiction, non-fiction and
children's books preferences here.
Clusters can also be used to
classify new data samples.
When a new sample is received,
like the orange sample here, compute
the similarity measure between it and
the centers of all clusters, and assign
a new sample to the closest cluster.
The label of that cluster,
manually determined through analysis,
is then used to classify the new sample.
In our book buyers' preferences example,
a new customer can be classified as being
either a science fiction, non-fiction or
children's books customer
depending on which cluster the new
customer is most similar to.
Once cluster labels have been determined,
samples in each cluster can be used as
labeled data for a classification task.
The samples would be the input
to the classification model.
And the cluster label would be
the target class for each sample.
This process can be used to provide much
needed labeled data for classification.
Yet another use of cluster results
is as a basis for anomaly detection.
If a sample is very far away, or
very different from any of the cluster
centers, like the yellow sample here,
then that sample is a cluster outlier and
can be flagged as an anomaly.
However, these anomalies
require further analysis.
Depending on the application, these
anomalies can be considered noise, and
should be removed from the data set.
An example of this would be a sample
with a value of 150 for age.
For other cases, these anomalous cases
should be studied more carefully.
Examples of this are in a credit
card fraud detection, or,
a network intrusion detection application.
In these applications, examples outside
of the norm are the interesting cases
that should be looked at to determine
if they represent potential problems.
To summarize, cluster analysis is used to
organize similar data items into groups or
clusters.
Analyzing the resulting clusters
often leads to useful insights
about the characteristics of each group,
as well as the underlying
structure of the entire data set.
Clusters require analysis and
interpretation to make
sense of the results,
since there are no labels associated with
samples or clusters in a clustering task.
In the next lecture, we will discuss
a specific algorithm for cluster analysis.